Biology 3 Notes for Spring 2016 - Intro to Life on Earth

Name: Taylor Lopez
Class: T-Th 6:00-7:15 Lecture, Lab Tues 7:30-9:20
Professor Leonard


/*---------------------------BEGINNING OF TEST 1---------------------------------*/

Chapters 1 - Intro to Life on Earth

1. Levels of Organization
    A. Organization
	1. Biosphere - All Life on earth & non-living things that support it
	2. Ecosystem - Community that includes non-living things
	3. Community - Species in an ecosystem that interact
	4. Species - collection of all populations of one multicellular type
	5. Population - Individuals of a species in an area
	6. Multicellular Organism - Individual of a species
	7. Organ System - 2 or more organs working together
	8. Organ - structure with 2 or more tissue types
	9. Tissue - similar cells that are grouped that perform the same function
	10. Cell - smallest unit of life
	11. Molecule - chemical component of cells
	12. Atom - smallest unit of an element
    B. The Scientific Method
	1. Definitions
	     A. The process of gathering evidence that is shareable, repeatable
	     B. Answers must be snapped by evidence
	2. Steps
	     A. Observation
	     B. Question the Observation
	     C. Hypothesis
	     D. Prediction (If hypothesis is true then...)
	     E. Experimentation
	     F. Conclusion
    C. Experimental Design
        1. Must be reproducible and shareable
	2. Sufficient sample size
	3. One variable at a time may be tested
	4. Must use controls

2. Characteristics of Living Things
    A. Organization & Complexity
	1. Exhibits organization & complexity
	2. At least one cell
    B. Growth and Reproduction
        1. Increase in size
	2. Reproduces
	3. Viruses are technically not living things
	   cannot reproduce without a host
    C. Response to Stimuli
        1. Respond to stimuli
	2. Even stationary things respond to stimuli
    D. Obtaining & using materials & energy
        1. All organisms must obtain energy
	2. Autotrophs & Heterotrophs
	   Autotroph - Makes own food
	   Heterotroph - Must eat food, like humans
    E. DNA
        1. Have genetic material
	2. Stores into to make proteins and to pass along
	   genetic info to offspring

3. Categorization of Life's Diversity
    A. Classification
    	1. All organisms are classified into a hierarchy to provide organization
	2. Three domains
	    - Bacteria: simplest organisms
	    - Archaea: simple unicellular organisms adapted to living in harsh
	    	       environment of high temp & or salinity
	    - Eukarya: are complex multicellular organisms
	3. Five Kingdoms
	    - Monera: Bacteria
	    - Protists: single celled (Plankton & Amoebas)
	    - Fungi
	    - Plants
	    - Animals
	4. Hierarchy
	    ---> Kingdom, Phylum, Class, Order, Family, Genus, Species
	    Mnemonic - Kids Prefer Candy Over Fancy Green Salads
	    Example - Lion
	    		K: Animalia
			P: Chordate
			C: Mammalian
			O: Carnivore
			F: Felidae
			G: Panthera
			S: Leo
    B. Binomial Nomenclature
    	1. Two name system of naming that gives each organisms a unique two-part name
	2. Human (Homo Sapiens) must be italicized or underlined

Chapter 2 - Atoms, Molecules, & Life
    A. Atomic & Molecular Structure
    	1. What are Atoms?
	    - Basic unit of matter
	    - Element: Pure form of matter containing only one element
	    	       92 naturally occurring elements
	    - Atoms are composed of smaller subatomic particles, the proteins
	      & neutrons which are found in the nucleus
	    - Electrons orbit the nucleus in what are known as shells, energy levels,
	      or valence levels
	      	First Shell: Max of 2
		   Shell #2: Max of 8
	    - If the outer shell is at its capacity for electrons, it is said to be inert
	    - Elements whose outer shells are not full are said to be reactive
	    - The atomic number is how many protons are in the nucleus of the element
	    - The atomic mass is the number of protons added to the number of neutrons
	    - An isotope of an element has the normal number of protons, but a different number of neutrons
	    	Most carbon as found in nature is 12_C
		One isotope is that 13_C (6 Protons + 7 Neutrons)
	    - Many isotopes are radioactive, and decay over time until they reach a more stable chemical state
	    - A compound is two or more elements combined together to make something new.
	      NaCL (Table Salt) is made from a toxic gas (CL) & Sodium (Na) an explosive metal.
    B. Bonds
    	1. Atoms are held together by bonds to form compounds
	    2. Atoms bond together with other atoms in order to achieve a full outer electron shell
	    3. Covalent bonds form when 2 or more atoms share electrons in their outer shells
	    4. If the e^- is shared roughly equally between the two atoms, it is non-polar, as each end
	    of the molecule doesn't have a charge
	   5. If e^-'s are not shared equally, it becomes polar. Each end of the molecule has a slight
	   +/- charge to it
	6. Ionic
	    - Ionic bonds form when electrons are transferred from one atom to another. Atoms that have
	      gained or lost electrons, altering the balance between protons & electrons.
	    - Na+ -> Cl- :--> NaCl (Salt) Na lends one e^- to the chlorine
	7. Hydrogen Bonds
	    - Is the attraction between the slightly (+) is a polar molecule * the slightly (-) charge
	      of a nearby polar molecule
    C. The importance of water
    	1. Due to its polarity water makes an excellent solvent
	2. Main transport medium, blood & urine are mostly H2O
	3. Water prevents drastic changes in temperature inside the body
	   due to its high heat capacity
    D. The pH Scale
        1. Definitions
	    - Acid: when dissolved in water, gives off hydrogen ions -> H+
	    - Base; when dissolved in water, gives off hydroxyl ions -> OH-
	2. Is a logarithmic system that runs from 0 to 14.
	3. Neutral pH is 7
	4. Above 7 -> Basic
	5. Below 7 -> Acid
	6. Just to the right or left of 7 are the weak "acid" or "bases"
	7. Substances that act as buffers help to minimize changes in pH
	    - Your body uses bicarbonate ions to help maintain the pH of your
	      blood in a very narrow range

Chapter 3 - Biological Molecules
    A. Vocab
    	1. The term organic refers to molecules with a carbon skeleton
	2. Inorganic molecules generally lack a carbon skeleton
	3. Monomers are small molecules that make up larger molecules
	4. Polymers are larger molecules
	5. Monomer -> Polymer
	  (glucose)  (glycogen)
    B. Types of Biomolecules
        1. Carbs are sugars & starches that the body uses for quick energy
	    - One Subunits - monosaccharides
	    - Two Subunits - disacchardies
	    -  2+ Subunits - polysaccharides
	2. Lipids are fats that are very high in calories. Fats from animals
	   are typically saturated (filled with max hydrogens) solid @ room
	   temperature. Unsaturated fats typically come from plant sources
	   liquid at room temperature
	3. Proteins are long chains of amino acids
        4. The nucleic acids of RNA & DNA, which store the body's
	   genetic info & produce the proteins we need
	5. ATP (Adenosine-Triphospahte)is the chemical
	   that provides the body's main source of energy

Chapter 4 - Cell Structure and Function

Vocab
    Cyto = Cell
    Pathogen = Disease causing organism

1. Cell Types
    A. Two Basic Cell Types
        1. The cells of a prokaryotic organisms (prokaryotes) are the simplest types of cells,
           they don't have a nucleus to hold their DNA, and don't have any type of complex inner structures, called organelles.
	   Bacteria are among the simplest of organisms and have a prokaryotic cell.
        2. The cells of eukaryotic organisms (eukaryotes) are more complex. These cells have a nucleus that holds the DNA,
           as well as having numerous parts inside the cell to carry out various functions (organelles).
           All plants and animals have these more complex eukaryotic cells.
    B. Animal vs. Plants Cells
	1. Animal cells are generally round in shape and have an outer cell membrane to hold the cell together.
	2. Plant cells are generally square in shape and, in addition to the cell membrane, have a rigid cell wall to give the cell shape and strength.
	   Also, the plant cells have chloroplasts, the organelle that allows them to photosynthesize.

2. Cell Function
    A. Cell Theory
	1. Every living thing is made of cells, which are the smallest units of life. All cells come from preexisting cells.
	2. Cells are small due to the limits of diffusion. If cells were too large, all of the chemicals that must move in and out of the cell couldn't do so fast enough.
    B. Organelles
	1. Organelles are intracellular structures and carry out specific functions.
	2. The cytoplasm is a jelly-like liquid that holds the organelles. {cyto = cell}
	3. The nucleus contains the cell's DNA. It is surrounded by a nuclear membrane.
	4. Ribosomes are the site of protein synthesis in the cell.
	5. The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) looks like a thin, folded ribbon that connects the nucleus to the plasma membrane. Its functions include making molecules that are used to construct
	   other organelles and separating newly made molecules into those that stay in the cell and those that don't.
	   There are 2 types.
		Rough ER is studded with ribosomes, while smooth ER is not.
		The smooth ER makes fatty acids and steroids and also functions to detoxify harmful substances in the liver.
	6. The Golgi complex looks like a stack of flattened sacs. Its function is to process and package proteins that have been made in the cell.
	7. Mitochondria are where ATP synthesis occurs. They are sometimes called the powerhouse of the cell.
	8. Lysosomes(little stomachs) are the sites of intracellular digestion, helping to digest worn-out cell parts and pathogens.
    C. The Cytoskeleton
	1. The cytoskeleton gives the cell shape, and in some cases allows for movement.
	2. The cytoskeleton is made of micro-filaments, intermediate filaments, and micro-tubules.

Chapter 5 - Call Membrane Structure & Function

1. Plasma Membrane
    A. Structure & Function
	1. The plasma membrane is made of lipids, proteins and carbohydrates. Cholesterol is one of the components.
	2. The membrane is made of 2 layers; this is why the structure is often referred to as a phospholipid bilayer.
	3. The phospholipid molecules that make up the membrane have 2 parts: a hydrophilic (water-loving) head that faces
	   the watery environment of the inside and outside of the cell, and a hydrophobic (water-hating) tail that faces inward.
	4. The membrane is selectively permeable. This means that is is able to let in good substances, such as nutrients and oxygen.
	   And keep out bad substances, such as wastes and toxins.
	5. The membrane also functions in communication between cells using gap junctions, can help to hold cells together via junctions called desmosomes.
	   And make cells leak-proof using tight junctions.
    B. Membrane Proteins
	1. There are a variety of proteins in the membrane. They may be either integral (completely within the membrane itself) or peripheral (stuck to the outside).
	2. Membrane proteins function to help move chemicals back and forth through the membrane. They also function as receptors for chemicals that bind to the membrane
	   or as enzymes that help to speed up chemical reactions.

2. Types of Cellular Transport
    A. Diffusion
	1. Diffusion is the movement of particles down a concentration gradient, from where there are more of them to where there are less of them, until equilibrium is reached.
	2. Diffusion is what happens when you take the lid off a bottle of something and the smell diffuses through the area.
	3. Diffusion just happens; no input of energy is required.
	4. Facilitated diffusion occurs when a protein molecule helps the diffusion process along.
    B. Osmosis
	1. Osmosis is the diffusion of water down a concentration gradient until equilibrium is reached.
	   It also just happens; no energy input is required.
	2. There are 3 possible osmotic conditions.
	   A) An isomotic condition occurs when there is no net movement of water.
	      A cell placed in an isomotic solution will stay the same shape and size. This means that the concentration
	      of particles in the solution is the same as the concentration of particles inside the cell.
	   B) A hypertonic condition occurs when there are more particles outside the cell than inside the cell.
	      This causes water to leave the cell, causing it to shrink.
	   C) A hypotonic condition occurs when there are more particles inside the cell, that there are in the solution.
	      This causes water to rush into the cell, swelling (or even bursting) it.
    C. Energy Requiring Transports
	1. Some processes require the input of energy in order to occur.
	2. Active transport moves particles against their concentration gradient (uphill).
	3. Endocytosis is the movement of substances into a cell (like nutrients).
	4. Exocytosis is the movement of substances out of a cell (like wastes).

Chapter 6 - Energy Flow in the Life of a Cell

1. Energy
    A. Definitions
	1. Energy is the capacity to do work
	2. "Work" may be making molecules, generating motion or generating heat.
	3. Potential energy is stored energy, like the stored energy of water behind a dam
	   or the stored electricity in a battery.
	4. Kinetic energy is the energy of motion, like water flowing over a dam.
    B. The Laws of Thermodynamics
	1. The First Law says that energy cannot be created or destroyed.
	2. The Second Law says that whenever energy is concerted from one form to another, the amount of useful energy decreases.
	   The "wasted" energy is usually given off as heat. Internal combustion engines are generally not very efficient, only
	   converting about 20% of the energy in fuel to moving the vehicle; the rest of the energy is wasted as heat.
	3. Living systems are generally more efficient; the human body converts about 38% of the energy in food we eat into useful activities;
	   the rest is given off as heat.
    C. Entropy
	1. Processes that proceed spontaneously lead to increasing disorder. Does this conflict with the general idea of evolution
	   that has simple organisms organizing into more complex organisms?
	2. Energy must be put in to reverse entropy. A box of random parts will not organize itself into something more complex without the input
	   of energy.

2. Energy and Chemical Reactions
    A. Definitions
	1. A chemical reaction is the conversion of one set of chemicals to another.
	2. The reactants are the beginning chemicals, and the products are the ending chemicals.
	3. Endergonic reactions require the input of energy in order to occur.
	   Example:
		ADP + P + energy == ATP
	4. Exergonic reactions release energy.
	   Example:
		ATP breaks down to ADP + P + energy
	5. Activation energy is the initial push of energy required to get a reaction going.
	6. Coupled reactions are when an exergonic reaction provides the energy to drive an endergonic reaction.
	   This situation occurs in photosynthesis -- the sun's energy drives sugar-making reactions in plants.

3. Adenosine Triphosphate (ATP)
    A. Energy Carrier Molecules (ECM)
	1. ATP is the most common ECM
	2. ATP is made of adenosine, a sugar called ribose, and 3 phosphate molecules
	3. The energy to make ATP comes from glucose.
	4. The breaking of the phosphate bond releases energy.
    B. Electron Carriers (EC)
	1. There are other molecules that transport energy within a cell.
	2. These molecules, like NAD+ and FAD, donate their electrons and the energy in them to drive endergonic reactions.

4. Metabolic Reactions
    A. Definitions
	1. Metabolism is the sum of all the different chemical reactions taking place in an organism.
	2. Homeostatis is the maintaining of a steady state in an organism. Some parameters that must be maintained in
	   equilibrium are blood pressure, heart rate, water balance, pH, body temperature, and glucose levels. These are
	   all monitored and controlled by the brain. Corrective action is taken to keep factors in their correct ranges.
	   For example, if your blood pressure becomes too thick because you are becoming dehydrated, your brain senses this
	   and gives you the sensation of thirst, which drives you to drink water to rehydrate yourself and return your blood
	   to the normal level of hydration.
    B. Enzymes
	1. Enzymes are specialized protein molecules that catalyze (speed up) chemical reactions.
	2. The molecules they affect are called substrates.
	3. They speed up reactions without being destroyed or forming byproducts.
	4. There are more than 2,000 known enzymes.
	5. An enzyme's functionality depends on its shape. If this shape is changed by extremes
	   of temperature or pH, it may be damaged or destroyed. This is called denaturation.
	   Most enzymes have a three dimensional shape; if this shape is damaged, the enzyme will not
	   function, just as a bent key will no longer fit in the lock.
	6. Most biological reactions occur best at normal body temperature and pH levels.

Chapter 7 - Photosynthesis

1. Photosynthesis
    A. The Reaction
	1. Photosynthesis is the conversion of the sun's energy into chemical energy by plants.
	   (A few other organisms can also photosynthesize, like some bacteria).
	2. The reactants are carbon dioxide (CO2) and water (H2O) and the products are
	   glucose (C6H12O6) and oxygen (O2). Notice that carbon dioxide is a critical input to
	   the reaction.
	   Example:
		6(CO2)+6(H2O) -> C6H12O6 + 6(O2)
    B. The Location
	1. Photosynthesis takes place in leaves (or other green parts, like stems). Leaves are
	   generally thin and easily penetrated by light. Plant that aren't green still have chlorophyll
	   and photosynthesize; they have other pigments that mask the presence of the green chlorophyll.
	2. Plants have a large surface area for photosynthesis.
	3. Plants have pores in their leave call stomata that open and close to let O2 and CO2 in and out,
	   as well as to let water out. In land plants, the stomata tend to be concentrated on the lower
	   surface of the leaf; this helps to reduce water loss. In water plants, the stomata are found
	   all over the left, since water loss isn't a concern.
	4. Photosynthesis happens in organelles called chloroplasts, which contain the green pigment chlorophyll.
	5. The semi-fluid substance inside leaves is called stroma, and it holds structures called thylakoids that look
	   like disc-shaped flatted sacs. It's in these thylakoids that light-dependent reactions of photosynthesis occur.
    C. Light and Dark Reactions
	1. The light-dependent reactions capture sunlight and convert it into ATP and a molecule called NADPH.
	   These reactions consume water and release O2. These reactions take place in the thylakoids in locations
	   called photosystems. Each of the photosystems contains proteins, chlorophyll and other pigments.
	2. The light-independent (dark) reactions use the ATP and NADPH to make glucose, using CO2 in the process.
	   The chemicals from these reactions are cycled back into the light reactions; since the process occurs in a cycle,
	   it's called the C3 or Calvin Cycle.

2. Water Conservation and Photosynthesis
    A. Carbon Dioxide
	1. CO2 is the required input for photosynthesis
	2. If the water supply to the plant is inadequate, the stomata leaves stay open, letting in CO2. This "normal"
	   pathway to photosynthesize is called the C3 pathway.
	3. If the plant is dry, the stomata close to save water. This prevents CO2 from entering, which slows or stops photosynthesis.
	4. This triggers a process called photorespiration, which is a wasteful process that prevents the Calvin Cycle
	   from producing glucose, essentially shutting down photosynthesis.
    B. Alternate Pathways
	1. Some plants have developed alternate pathways to reduce photosrespiration, allowing them to
	   produce glucose even during hot, dry conditions.
	2. The two pathways are:
		A) Some plants, called C4 plants, use a separate series of reactions to capture carbon in one part of the leaf
	 	   and move it to another part of the leaf where it can enter the Calvin Cycle. Crabgrass, corn and sugarcane
		   are examples of C4 plants.
		B) Some plants, go a step further and in addition to using this C4 pathway also keep their stomata closed
		   during the day to conserve water, this is called CAM. The cacti are CAM plants.

Chapter 8 - Harvesting Energy: Glycolysis & Cellular Respiration

1. Cellular Respiration
    A. Energy and Cell Work
	1. Cells need energy to make and transport molecules, grow, repair, and divide.
	2. Energy is stored in the bonds of molecules like fats & carbohydrates.
	   The energy in these bonds must be transferred to the bonds of energy carrier molecules
	   like ATP.
	3. Cells break down glucose for energy. Brain cells can only use glucose for energy--nothing else!
	4. Photosynthesis is the ultimate source of energy. All organisms ultimately rely on plants.
	5. Photosynthesis and glucose metabolism are complementary processes.
		6CO2 + 6H2O -> C6H12O6 + 6O2 is Photosynthesis
		C6H12O6 + 6O2 -> 6CO2 + 6H2O + energy is Cellular Respiration
    B. The Steps of Glucose Metabolism
	1. Glycolysis
		A) Glycolysis takes place in the cytoplasm of the cell
		B) One molecule of glucose breaks down into two molecules of pyruvate
		C) The process doesn't need oxygen to proceed (it is anaerobic)
		D) There is a net production of two molecules of ATP per glucose
	2. The Citric Acid (Krebs) Cycle
		A) The process requires oxygen (is aerobic)
		B) The process occurs in the mitochondria
		C) In a series of steps, the pyruvate from glycolysis is broken down
		   to CO2 and H2O.
		D) There is a net production of 2 molecules of ATP.
		E) The electron carrier molecules NADH and FADH2 are also produced.
	3. The Electron Transport Chain
		A) This process occurs in the mitochondria.
		B) This process is also aerobic
		C) The process occurs in a series of steps that take electrons from NADH and
		   FADH2 and move them down a "chain" of molecules until they ultimately reach
  		   O2, which is the final electron acceptor. This is why we must have a
		   constant supply of O2; without it, this process stops immediately.
		D) Most of the cell's energy is produced during this process; up to 34
		   molecules of ATP per glucose molecule.

2. Fermentation
    A. Fermentation is Anaerobic
	1. Fermentation provides a mechanism for organisms(like some bacteria) to live in
	   environments with no oxygen.
	2. These types of environments are often found beneath bodies of water like lakes
	   and oceans and in marshes, swamps, and bogs.
    B. Mechanisms of Action
	1. Fermentation only involves Glycolysis, no Krebs cycle or ETC can occur.
	2. The pyruvate produced by glycolysis acts as an electron acceptor for NADH.
	   The pyruvate is converted to either ethanol or lactate (depending on the organism
	   that is undergoing fermentation).
	3. The NADH is converted back to a molecule called NAD+, which keeps the glycolysis
	   and ATP production going.
    C. Ethanol or Lactate Production
	1. Alcoholic fermentation by yeasts produces ethanol and CO2 as byproducts. This
	   type of fermentation by yeasts produces the beer and wine, as well as bread products.
	   The CO2 produces the bubbles in beer and Champagne. In bread products, the CO2 produced
	   by yeast causes the bread to rise. The alcohol evaporates away during the cooking process
	   The spaces left behind in the bread represent where the carbon dioxide bubbles were.
	2. Some organisms, like bacteria, produce lactate as they are undergoing fermentation.
	   This process produces foods like sauerkraut, dill pickles, cheeses, and yogurt.
	   Different species of bacteria produce the different flavors of cheeses.
	3. Prior to refrigeration, these processes allowed food to be preserved for long
	   period of time. Prior to modern sanitation, alcoholic beverages were often the
	   only safe fluid to drink, as the water was often contaminated with pathogens.


/*---------------------------END OF TEST 1---------------------------------*/


/*---------------------------BEGINNING OF TEST 2----------------------------*/


Chapter 9 - The continuity of Life: Cellular Respiration

1. Cell Division Basics
    A. Why do cells divide?
	1. Cells reproduce by cell division, which gives rise to 2 daughter cells
	   which are identical to the original cell
	2. Each cell contains the genetic information, found on one or more chromosomes.
 	3. Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is the material that holds the genetic info.
	   DNA is composed of repeating units, called nucleotides, which are made up of sugar
	   called deoxyribose, phosphate groups and one of four bases. The four bases are
	   adenine, guanine, cytosine and thymine.
	4. The units of inheritance are called genes, which are sections of DNA
    B. Two Types of Reproduction
	1. Simple organisms, like bacteria, simply split in two in order to reproduce. This
	   process is called binary fission and makes up what is known as the prokaryotic cell cycle.
  	   Organisms produced by this method are generally all clones of each other, with no genetic diversity.
	2. Most organisms, like humans, utilize the more complex process of sexual reproduction, which produces
	   gametes (eggs and sperm). This process produces individuals that are genetically unique from each other,
	   and is called the eukaryotic cell cycle.

2. The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
    A. Organization of Chromosomes
	1. DNA is found in the nucleus of eukaryotic organisms.
	2. Humans have 46 chromosomes (23 pairs). One of each pair
	   comes from each parent. The chromosomes are numbered 1-23
	   and each pair are called homologous chromosomes (one of each pair comes from each parent)
	3. Cells that have all 23 pairs, which are all cells except gametes, are called diploids, also written as 2n.
	   Gamete cells have half the number of chromosomes are called haploid, also written as n.
	4. The chromosomes themselves are made up of two chromatids, which are held together in the
	   center by a structure called a centromere.
   B. Steps of the Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
	1. The eukaryotic cell cycle is divided into two major phases; interphase and cell division.
	2. During interphase, the cell acquires nutrients from the environment, grows and duplicates
	   its chromosomes. Interphase is divided into three sections.
		A) During G1, cells grow and differentiate (turn into whatever kind of cell they are going to become)
		B) During S, the cell duplicates its chromosomes.
		C) During G2, cell growth continues and the cell prepares to divide.
	3. After all these steps are completed, which take about a day in human cells, the cell prepares to divide its nucleus
	   in a process called mitosis.
    C. Mitosis
	1. Mitosis is a series of steps, divides the nucleus, and as a result produces cells that are 
	   identical to the original cell. As an example, if your skin is damaged and must be repaired
	   your body will produce new identical cells through the process of mitosis.
	2. Mitosis is divided into several phases.
		A) During prophase, the duplicated chromosomes condense from what is called chromatin.
		   Chromatin is what the genetic material is called before mitosis occurs. It just appears
	  	   as a mass of thready material. Also during this phase the spindle microtubules appear.
		   These are structures that will literally help pull apart the chromosomes.
		B) During metaphase, each chromosomes lines up along the equator of the cell.
		C) During anaphase, the centromere holding each chromosome dissolves, allowing
		   sister chromatids to separate and move toward opposite sides of the cell.
		D) During telophase, when the chromatids reach the sides of the cell, the spindle
		   microtubules disintegrate and a nuclear envelope forms around the chromosomes.
		- A Mnemonic for this process is called
			Pizza Makes A Triangle
	3. The summary of mitosis is that starting with one original cell, two identical daughter
	   cells are produced. These cells are genetically identical to the starting cell and
	   to each other, and are diploid(2n).
    D. Meiosis
	1. The key to sexual reproduction in eukaryotes is meiosis, the production of haploid cells
	   with unpaired chromosomes from diploid parent cells with paired chromosomes.
	2. If it wasn't for meiosis, the number of chromosomes in the nuclei of each subsequent
	   generation would double. That is, each time a sperm and egg united at fertilization
	   the number of chromosomes would double. Meiosis prevents this by producing gametes that
	   are haploid, so that upon fertilization a new individual that is diploid is produced. 
	3. Meiosis has some steps in common with mitosis, and some that are different. Meiosis is
	   accomplished in two rounds of cell division. They have the same names as the steps in
	   mitosis, but are distinguished by the Roman numerals I and II.
	4. The steps of meiosis are:
		A) During prophase I, the homologous chromosomes pair off with each other, rather
		   than separating. During this crucial step, the homologous pairs randomly exchange
		   genetic information with each other in a process called crossing over. It's this
		   process that helps to create the genetic diversity among individuals that makes us
		   all unique from each other.
		B) During metaphase I, the chromosome pairs line up at the equator of the cell, just
		   like during mitosis.
		C) During anaphase I, one member of each pair of chromosomes moves to the opposite side
		   of the cell (note that the centromere does not dissolve)
		D) During telophase I, the cell splits in two, just like it does in mitosis. 
		   (A.K.A cytokinesis)
		E) The steps of meiosis II are basically the same as they are during mitosis.
		   During metaphase II the chromosomes line up at the equator.
		   During anaphase II the centromeres dissolve and one of each of the chromatids goes
		   to each side of the cell.
		   During telophase II and cytokinesis, the cell splits in two.
		F) The net result of meiosis is that from an original, diploid cell, four haploid cells
		   are produced.

Chapter 10 - Patterns of Inheritance

1. Vocab
    A. Inheritance: is the passing along of hereditary traits from one generation to the next
    B. Genetics: is the study of inheritance
    C. The genotype: is an organism's genetic makeup
    D. The phenotype: is an organism's physical appearance. It is possible that two organisms
       can appear the same (same phenotype) but have different genotypes.
    E. Alleles: are alternative forms of a gene that code for the same trait. Alleles can also
       be known as variants. As an example, the alleles for hair color in humans are brown, black,
       red, blond, etc.
    F. A mutation: is a permanent change in an allele that produces a variant of the same trait.
    G. A dominant allele: is one that dominates or masks the presence of another allele. In other
       words, it is the trait seen most often in a population. For example, the dominant alleles
       for hair and eye color in humans are brown. Dominant alleles are always represented by
       capital letters when writing them in genetic shorthand. For example, if tallness was a
       dominant allele, it would be written as a "T"
    H. A recessive allele is one that is masked by another allele; in other words, the variant of a trait
       that is seen least often in a population. A recessive allele for eye color in humans is blue. In
       genetic shorthand, recessive alleles are represented by the lower case letter of dominant trait.
       In the example above for tallness (T), shortness would be represented by "t".
    I. An individual who is homozygous for a trait has inherited the same gene for that trait on each
       homologous chromosome. In other words, that individual has gotten the same allele for a trait
       from each parent. As an example, if an individual has inherited the dominant trait for tallness
       from each parent, that individual would be called homozygous dominant for that trait, and the
       genetic shorthand would be written as "TT". These individuals are known as true breeders, since
       they aren't hiding any recessive genes. Note that an individual could also be homozygous recessive,
       having gotten a copy of the recessive gene from each parent. This individual would be written as "tt".
    J. If an individual has inherited a different copy of the gene from each parent, they are called
       heterozygous. The shorthand would be written as "Tt". Note that this individual would still be tall
       because the tallness is dominant and hides the other copy of the recessive gene. These individuals
       are called carries, since they are "carrying" on copy of the recessive gene.
    K. Incomplete dominance is when neither member of a pair of alleles dominates over the other and
       the heterozygote is a mixture of the two traits. AS an example, snapdragon flowers can be either
       red or white when they are homozygous. The heterozygote produces pink flowers.
		
		RR (red flowers) crossed with rr (white flowers) = Rr (pink flowers)

    L. The sex chromosomes (X & Y) are responsible for the transmission of several non-sexual traits.
       One of these is red-green color blindness, which is passed along on the X chromosome from the mother.
       These conditions are called sex-linked traits.
    M. Co-dominance occurs when both alleles of a pair are fully expressed in the heterozygote. An example
       of this is the ABO blood typing system. There are people with Type A blood (Type A proteins on their
       blood cells), people with Type B blood (Type B proteins) and people with Type AB blood (both A & B proteins).
       Type O blood has neither A nor B proteins.
    N. The independent inheritance of two or more traits is called the law of independent assortment.
       This means that genes for different traits, like those that determine seed color and shape in 
       plants, can be inherited independently of each other and not influence each other during the
       formation of gametes.

2. Punnett Squares
    1. Punnett squares are a method to determine the statistical outcomes of various traits when two
       individuals are bred together.
    2. A monohybrid cross utilizes a four-square grid to examine the outcomes of one trait at a time.
    3. A dihybrid cross utilizes a 16-square grid to examine the outcomes of two traits at a time.

3. Genetic Disorders
    1. Turner syndrome affects 1 in 3,000 females, who have only one X chromosome
       and are infertile.  
    2. Trisomy affects 1 in 5,000 females, who have 3X chromosomes, are usually fertile
       but may have below average intelligence.
    3. Klinefelter syndrome affects 1 in 1,000 males, who have an extra X chromosome
       (XXY). These individuals are usually infertile and may have mixed sexual characteristics.
    4. Jacob syndrome affects 1 in 1,000 males who have an extra Y chromosome (XYY). These individuals
       have elevated testosterone, severe acne, are tall and have decreased intelligence and increased
       aggresiveness.
    5. Trisomy 21 (Down Syndrome) individuals have an extra copy of chromosome 21. These individuals
       have varying levels of developmental disability, from mild to severe. It occurs in about 1 out
       of 700 births, with greatly increased risk for mothers over 40 yeards old.
       (women--how old are your eggs?)

Chapter 11 - DNA: The Molecule of Heredity

1. DNA Structure
    A. DNA's Structure and Components
	1. DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) forms the inherited material inside each cell.
	   Each cell contains the information required to reproduce itself.
	2. Genes, which are the units of inherited traits, are made of segments of DNA.
	   Humans have about 20,000 genes to code for all of the characteristics required to
	   make a human a human These genes contain about 3 billion base pairs (AT, CG).
	   It is the specific order of these base pairs that produces our human traits. The
	   discovery of this information was the result of the Human Genome Project, a lengthy
	   expensive process that was the result of a multi-national effort completed in 2003.
	   You can now have your genes sequenced for about $1,000 or so (a company called
	   23 and me provides this service). The speed and relative cheapness of this was unheard
	   of a few years ago. People use this to determine whether they carry genes for diseases
	   like cancer, for example.
	3. Genes control protein synthesis. Genes contain the "recipes"; that is, the instructions
	   to produce the proteins required for us to live.
	4. The structure of DNA was discovered in the 1950's by two men -- James Watson and
	   Francis Crick. They received the Nobel Prize for this discovery.
		A) DNA is a chain of repeating units called nucleotides.
		B) Each nucleotide consists of three parts:
		    1) A compound called a base. There are 4 bases in total:
			Adenine  (A)
			Thymine  (T)
			Cytosine (C)
			Guanine  (G)
		    2) A sugar called deoxyribose
		    3) A phosphate group (PO4-)
		C) The DNA molecule looks like a twisted ladder, and is called a double helix.
		   The sugar and phosphate molecules form the sides (rails) of the ladder. While
		   the bases form the steps (rungs).
		D) Each rung is made of 2 bases bonded together. They are pair together in a certain
		   way: A with T and C with G; never any other way.
	5. DNA is like a language and A,T,C & G, are the letters. It is merely the order of the letters
	   that determines the genes. Nothing else varies -- the deoxyribose sugar and the phospahte groups
	   are always the same. The order of the letters determine each gene, and each person's genes have
	   a uniqueness to them that makes us each different (unless you have an identical twin). Note however
	   that the amount of genetic variability from one person to the next is only a few percent -- that's
	   all it takes to make us each unique.

    B. DNA Replication (copying)
	1. Before cells can divide, the cell must make an exact copy of the DNA, so that each new
	   cell can be identical to the original one.
	2. The ingredients involved are the original (parental) DNA strands and the bases (A,T,C & G)
	3. Several enzymes direct the process. DNA helicases break apart the DNA molecule by "unzipping"
	   the weak hydrogen bonds between each base in the DNA rungs. DNA polymerases move along each
	   strand of parental DNA, matching un-complementary bases to the bases of the parental strand.
	   Once finished, DNA ligases reattach everything back together again.
	4. This process is called semi-conservative, since each new DNA molecule is made of one original
	   strand and one newly created strand.

2. Mutations
    A. Definitions
	1. Mutations are changes in the base sequence of DNA. Mutations may be harmful; if they are really
	   damaging a cell or organism inheriting such a mutation may quickly die. Some mutations have no
	   effect; in rare instances they may be beneficial.
	2. They may occur as a result of mistakes during DNA replication, or from environmental factors
	   like chemicals or radiation.
	3. Even with all this, errors in DNA are quite rate, with completed DNA strands having only one
	   mistake per 100 million to one billion base pairs. There are DNA repair enzymes that "proofread"
	   each daughter strand both during and after synthesis and repair any mistakes found. 

    B. Types of Mutations
	1. Base substitution occurs when incorrect bases are incorporated into the growing
 	   DNA double helix.
	2. Insertion mutations occur when one or more extra bases are inserted when DNA is replicating.
	3. Deletion mutations occur when one or more bases are deleted when DNA is replicating.
    
    C. Effects
	1. Deletions or insertions may have catastrophic effects due to the fact that all genetic
	   information that follows downstream from the mutation will be affected.
	2. As an example, consider the following string literal "The Dog Saw The Cat"
	    	Deleting every 'E' and reshuffling the remaining letters produces gibberish:
				THD OGS AWT HCA T
	3. Base substitutions may or may not have an effect. Most of the amino acids can be
	   produced by several combination of bases, so an occasional error may end up producing
	   the desired amino acid anyway. For example, there are five possible combinations of
	   bases that will produce the amino acid leucine. Most of the 20 amino acids have this
	   type of redundancy so that mistakes are less likely to result in the amino acid not
	   being reproduced.

Chapter 12 - Gene Expression & Regulation

1. RNA: The Other Nucleic Acid
    A. RNA Info
	1. Ribonucleic Acid (RNA) is a single-stranded molecule
	2. RNA substitutes the base uracil for thymine (it pairs with adenine)
	3. RNA uses sugar ribose (rather than deoxyribose)
	4. There are 3 types of RNA
	    a) Messenger RNA (mRNA) directs the synthesis of proteins
	    b) Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) makes up the ribosomes, which are sites of protein synthesis
	    c) Transfer RNA  (tRNA) bring individual amino acids to the ribosomes and hold them
	       in place while they are built into the growing protein.

2. The Genetic Code, Transcription, Translation & Gene Expression
    A. The Genetic Code
	1. The genetic code is the "dictionary" that is used to make proteins from the 20 different amino
	   acids. It translates the sequence of bases in DNA and RNA into the sequence of amino acids in
	   proteins.
	2. Each amino acid is coded for by a sequence of three bases. These three-base are called triplets
	   or codons.
	3. Some amino acids are coded for by only one codon; most of them have multiple codons that produce
	   the same amino acid.
	4. All proteins being with the amino acid methionine, which is called the start codon.
	5. Three codons serve as stop codons; when these codons are reached, the protein is doing being made.
	
    B. Transcription
	1. Transcription is the process of copying DNA, which occurs in the nucleus.
	2. DNA server as the template to make mRNA. Each sequence of 3 bases of DNA is transcribed into
	   a complementary 3 base codon, following the base pairing rules. For example, the series CCG on
	   the DNA would be translated into the mRNA codon GGC.
	3. When your body needs to make more of a certain protein, enzymes find the correct gene in the DNA
	   where the instructions are located. The enzymes unzip the area of the DNA to be copied and travel along
	  it from start to finish, making codons from each 3 base sequence.
	4. When the mRNA sequence is done, it detaches from the DNA and enzymes close the DNA back up.
    
    C. Translation
	1. Translation is the process that takes the mRNA that was copied from DNA and uses it to make a protein.
	   This process occurs in the cytoplasm, on the ribosomes. 
	2. There are free amino acids floating around in the cytoplasm, each attached to a tRNA molecule.
	3. Beginning with a start codon and ending with a stop codon, the tRNA molecules bring amino acids,
	   one at a time, in the correct order, to build the protein on the ribosome.
	4. Each tRNA molecule has 2 things attached to it. On one end is an amino acid; on the other end
	   is an anti-codon, which is a complement of a codon.	
	5. For example, the codon AA on mRNA would be paired up with the anti-codon UUU on a tRNA molecule.
	6. This process occurs over and over, very rapidly, until the protein is completed. The average
	   protein only takes a few seconds to be made. It then detaches from the ribosome and is ready
	   to be used wherever it is needed.

    D. Gene Expression
	1. Gene expression is the transcription and translation of a gene.
	2. Human cells contain all 20,000 genes of the human genome, but most cells express only
	   a small number of them.
	3. The genes expressed depend of the type of cell. For example, males have the gene for
	   casein, which is a milk protein, but never express it.
	4. The environment can have an effect of gene expression. Birds only express the genes for
	   mating and nesting behavior during warm weather, when their offspring have the best chance
	   for survival. 

Chapter 14 - Principles of Evolution

1. The Fossil Record
     A. The Nature of Fossils
	1. A fossil is a trace of a long-dead organism
	2. Fossils are often found in sedimentary rock, which is formed when sediment is laid
	   down by wind or water.
	3. Fossils usually develop from the hard parts of organisms, such as bones and teeth. Soft
	   parts usually decay or are eaten before they can fossilize.
    
    B. Distribution of Fossils
	1. The lowest layers of sedimentary rock are assumed to be the oldest; this is called relative
	   age.
	2. Fossils show that many organisms that once existed are now extinct.
	3. Fossils show that some species are living where similar ones that existed in the past
	   are now extinct, like modern-day kangaroos and armadillos.

2. Charles Darwin & His Theories
    A. History of Darwin
	1. He was born in England in 1809
	2. He sailed around the South Pacific for 5 years as the science officer on the ship
	   HMS Beagle. He collected huge amounts of data and samples from his travels.
	3. Upon returning, he published his famous work "On the Origin of Species" after
	   more than 25 years of thinking and writing.

    B. His Theories
	1. The theory of Descent with Modification states that the newer life forms appearing
	   in the fossil record are descendants of older species, and that all species have
	   descended from a few types of life.
	2. The theory of natural selection, also sometimes called survival of the fittest,
	   states that some individuals develop traits that help them to cope better with the
	   environment, and that organisms with more favorable traits will be able to reproduce
	   more. A population adapts to the environment as favorable traits increase.

3. Evidence of Evolution
    A. Homologous and Analogous Structures
	1. Homologous structures have the same evolutionary origin, despite current differences
	   in function or appearance. For example, the forelimbs of penguins, alligators, humans
	   and bates all have the same skeletal structure, even though they perform different functions.
	2. Analogous structures perform the same function, and may look similar, but are very different
	   in internal anatomy. For example, the wings of moths and birds are analogous (allow for flight),
	   but are made of very different structures.
    
    B. Vestigal Structures
	1. Vestigal structures were of some use to an ancestor, but are of no known current use now.
	2. Vestigal structures may provide clues as to the origin of a modern species. For example,
	   did the whales evolve from a land species?
	3. Example of vestigal structures in humans include the tail bone, wisdom teeth, and appendix.
	   Examples for other animals include pelvic bones in whales and some snakes and the dew claws
	   in dogs.

    C. Similarities in Embryology
	1. The early stages of vertebrate embryos are very similar to each other.
	2. These similarities fade as development proceeds.

    D. Similarities in Macromolecules
	1. Many species share molecules that are very similar.
	2. Many species use hemoglobin to carry oxygen in the blood. Human and gorilla
	   hemoglobin differs by only one amino acid.

4. Patterns of Evolution
    A. Co-evolution
	1. Co-evolution is the change in two or more species in close association with each
	   other over time.
	2. Example are the relationships between predators and prey, parasites and hosts
	   and plants and pollinators. For example, the Ophrys orchid resembles a female bee.
	   The male bee attempts to mate with it, pollinating the flower in the process.
    
    B. Convergent Evolution
	1. This is when organisms that appear to be closely related are not. This occurs when
	   the environment selects for a particular phenotype. An example is the shark (a fish)
	   and the dolphin (a mammal).

    C. Divergent Evolution
	1. This occurs when two or more species become dissimilar over time. This usually occurs
	   in response to a group of the animals moving to a different habitat, like a flock of birds
	   being blown to a new area.
	2. May result in the formation of a new species.

Chapter 15 - How Populations Evolve

1. Population and Genes
    A. Gene Pool
	1. The gene pool is the sum of all the genes in a population
	2. The relative proportion of each allele for a trait is the allele frequency.
	3. Evolution happens to populations over a long time.

    B. Hardy-Weinberg Principle
	1. This is a theoretical model used to help understand how populations evolve
	2. Under some conditions, and equilibrium of allele frequencies will be reached. In
	   other words, no matter how many generations there are of a population, the allele
	   frequencies will stay the same -- the population won't evolve.

2. Causes of Evolution
    A. Mutations
	1. Mutations are essential to the process of evolution.
	2. Most are neutral, but may also be helpful or harmful.
    
    B. Gene Flow
	1. The movement of alleles between populations is known as gene flow.
	2. When individuals move from one population to another and interbreed, alleles are transferred
	   from one gene pool to another.

    C. Small Populations
	1. The process by which chance events change allele frequencies is called genetic drift. These
	   chance events can be the result of natural disasters, like fires or floods that wipe out many
	   members of a population.
	2. These effects have much more impact on a small population than they do on a large population.
	3. A population bottleneck results from the drastic reduction in a population, where only a few
	   individuals remain.
	4. The founder effect occurs when an isolated group of individuals populates an area and develop
	   traits that are different from the main population.

    D. Nonrandom Mating
	1. Inbreeding results when individual mate with a limited number of potential partners in a small
	   area.
	2. This process tends to increase the number of individuals that inherit the same genes from each
	   parent; this results in an increase in the number of genetic diseases found in the population.

    E. Natural Selection
	1. In a hypothetical equilibrium population, no genotype has any advantage over another.
	2. The reality is that as populations evolve, some individuals acquire traits that allow them
	   to survive more successfully than others.

3. Natural Selection
    A. Comes from Unequal Reproduction
	1. Natural selection shapes the evolution of populations as they adapt to their environment.
	2. Organisms must survive long enough to reproduce in order to pass their genes along.
	   Animals that are defective or do not live long enough to survive until reproductive age
	   will not have the chance to pass along their genetic material.

    B. Natural Selection Acts on Phenotypes
	1. Natural selection acts on the structures and behaviors of a population.
	2. Adaptations help an organism survive and reproduce
	3. Sexual selection helps to ensure that only the best genes are passed along
	4. Typically, males compete for dominance to determine the alpha male. This male is the only
	   one that will mate with the females in the area, ensuring that only the best genetic material
	   is passed along.

Chapter 16 - The Origin of Species

1. Species
    A. Definitions
	1. A species is a group of interbreeding individuals that are reproductively isolated from other
	   groups.
	2. Reproductive isolation is the inability to breed outside the species group.

    B. Isolating Mechanisms
	1. These prevent mating between different species, which would be a waste of time and gametes.
	2. Geographical isolation prevents interbreeding between species because the different populations
	   never come into contact with each other.
	3. Ecological isolation occurs when two populations occupy different habitats in the same general
	   area.
	4. Time isolation occurs when different species breed (come into "heat") at different times of the year
	   or pollinate at different times of the year.
	5. Behavioral isolation occurs when the mating rituals of one species are not recognized by
	   another species.
	6. The gametes of one species will not fertilize another species, or the resulting offspring are
	   sterile. For example, donkeys and horses can mate and produce a mule, but the mule is sterile.

2. Extinction 
    A. Background Info
	1. Extinction is the death of the last members of a species.
	2. The majority of all species that have lived are extinct.
	3. There have been five major periods of extinction, the most recent one 65 millions years ago
	   that wiped out the dinosaurs (and almost everything else).
	4. Some experts believe we are currently in another period of mass extinction.

    B. Causes
	1. One species may out-compete another, driving it to extinction.
	2. Habitat changes and destruction are the leading causes of extinction. In modern times,
	   these are almost always caused by humans.

Chapter 17 - The History of Life

1. Beginnings of Life
    A. Spontaneous Generation
	1. Prior to the 1800's, it was though that species just sprang up from nowhere.
	2. Early experiments by scientists including Louis Pasteur helped to disprove
	   this idea. These experiments showed that mixing basic chemicals like methane,
	   ammonia, hydrogen and water and sparking them with electricity can produce
	   organic molecules.

    B. RNA & Ribozymes
	1. RNA may have been the first self-replicating molecule
	2. Researchers have found naturally occurring ribozymes, which may have led to the
	   production of RNA.

2. Early Organisms
    A. The Earliest Organisms
	1. Early organisms were anaerobic prokaryotes (bacteria).
	2. They had to be anaerobic, since the Earth lacked oxygen.

    B. Arrival of Photosynthesis
	1. Some cells developed the ability to use the sun to make sugar.
	2. Photosynthesis introduced oxygen into the atmosphere.

    C. Arrival of Eukaryotes
	1. The first eukaryotic cells are thought to have arisen around 1.7
	   billions years ago.
	2. These were more complex cells, with internal structures are membranes.

3. Multicellular Organisms
    A. Algae 
	1. Algae were likely the first multicellular organisms. They appeared about
	   1.2 billion years ago.
	2. Increased size helped to prevent being eaten by predators.
	3. Cell specialization allowed for the development of root-like and leaf-like structures

    B. Animals
	1. The earliest animal fossils date from between 544-600 million years ago.
	2. Early animals included sponges, jelly fish, and ancestors of worms, mollusks
	   (snails and so forth) and arthropods (insects and so forth).

4. Invasion of Land
    A. Algae
	1. Algae gave rise to the first land plants 475 million years ago.
	2. They developed characteristics that helped them to survive outside of water, such as 
	   a water-resistant coating to reduce water loss.

    B. Early Plants
	1. Early plants were restricted to watery environment, like today's ferns.
	2. Over time, plants developed the use of eggs and pollen, so that water was not
	   needed for fertilization.

    C. Animals
	1. After the development of land plants, animals were able to leave the oceans to find food
	   on land. 
	2. The earliest land animals were probably arthropods, animals that include today's insects,
	   spiders, crabs, and so forth. These animals already had an exoskeleton to help them to 
	   survive on land.
	3. Amphibians are the link between the water and the land. Amphibians must have access to water
	   for reproduction. Frogs lay their soft eggs in the water, and must also keep their skin moist
   	   to help them to breathe.
	4. Reptiles, which have lost the need for water for reproduction, evolved from amphibians. Reptiles have
	   dry, leathery skin and their eggs have shells that can survive on land.
	5. Birds and mammals evolved from reptiles.

    D. Human Evolution
	1. Humans belong to a group of mammals known as primates, which include the lemurs, monkeys and apes.
	   Hominids are humans and their immediate ancestors, the chimps, gorillas, orangutans and gibbons.
	2. The oldest primate fossils are about 55 million years old. Only fragments of bones are usually found.
	3. The structure of skeletal parts can give clues as to whether the organism walked upright and how big
	   its skull was.
	4. The earliest modern humans appeared in Africa 160,000 to 195,000 years ago.
	5. Primates have several characteristics that set us apart from other animals.
		1) Moveable fingers are toes
		2) Grasping hands and in some cases grasping feet
		3) Binocular color vision. This helps to determine the depth perception
		   and whether fruit is ripe or not.
		4) Rotating shoulder joints
		5) All primates have similar dental structure, with a variety of tooth shapes.
		6) The opposable thumb.
		7) Very few organisms are bipedal -- standing upright on two feet.


/*---------------------------END OF TEST 2----------------------------*/


/*--------------------------BEGINNING OF TEST 3-----------------------*/

Chapter 32 - Circulation

1. Features and Functions
    A. Features
	1. There is a pump, the heart, that keeps blood circulating
	2. The blood serves as the means of transport
	3. The blood vessels are a series of tubes that move the blood throughout the body

    B. Functions
	1. Oxygen is delivered to all tissues, and carbon dioxide is remove
	2. Nutrients are delivered to all tissues
	3. Waste products are removed from tissues 
	4. Hormones are delivered to tissues
	5. Adjustments to blood flow help to regulate body temperature
	6. Circulating cells from the immune system help to protect against disease

2. The Heart
    A. Anatomy
	1. The heart is made of 4 chambers
	    a) The upper two chambers are called the atria (singular: atrium)
	    b) The lower two chambers are called the ventricles
	2. The right and left halves of the heart are separated by a wall called the septum.
	3. Blood is only allowed to flow in one direction , and flow is controlled with one way valves.
	    a) The bicuspid valve controls blood flow from the left atrium to the left ventricle.
	    b) The tricuspid valve controls blow flow from the right atrium to the right ventricle.
	    c) These two valves together are called the atrioventricular (AV) valves
	    d) The pulmonary valve controls blood flow out to the lungs.
	    e) The aortic valve controls blood flow out to the aorta.
	    f) These two valves are called the semi-lunar (SL) valves.
	4. It is the opening and closing of these valves that makes the heart sounds
	   that can be heard with a stethoscope.

    B. Blood Circulation
	1. Blood is divided into two circulatory systems. 
	2. The pulmonary circulation is the circulation of blood to and from the lungs.
	   This is done by the right side of the heart.
	3. The systemic circulation is the circulation throughout the rest of the body, and is
	   done by the left side of the heart. This is why the left side of the heart is more muscular;
	   It has more work to do.

    C. Electrical Activity of the Heart
	1. There is a small group of cells on the right atrium that are self-excitable. These cells,
	   called the sinoatrial (SA) node, are the heart's pacemaker, and set the pace of the heart
	   rate.
	2. This impulse then passes down the heart to another group of cells called the atrioventricular
	   (AV) node.
	3. From here, the electrical activity continues through the ventricles.
	4. This specific pathway for the electrical signals ensures that the heart beats as a unit
	   (the atria contract, then the ventricles contract), so that the heart pumps efficiently.
	5. A machine called an ECG measures the electrical activity of the heart and can be used to
	   diagnose heart diseases.

    D. Blood Pressure
	1. Contraction of the ventricles creates blood pressure
	2. The pressure when the ventricles contract is called the systolic pressure, and is the
	   upper number in the blood pressure measurement.
	3. The pressure in between beats is called the diastolic pressure, and is the lower
	   number. "Normal" blood pressure is 120/80, measured in mm of mercury.

3. Blood
    A. Physical Characteristics
	1. Blood is a liquid connective tissue.
	2. Blood is denser and thicker than water.
	3. Blood temperature is slightly higher than body temperature
	4. Blood pH is tightly controlled at 7.35-7.45 pH.
	5. Total blood volume in an adult man is about 1.5 gallons.

    B. Functions
	1. Blood transports gases, nutrients, hormones, waste products and heat.
	2. Blood helps maintain body temperature. Blood is mostly water, and water resists
	   changes in temperature. Blood can also be brought to the skin to lose heat, or
	   moved to the core to save heat.
	3. Blood can form clots to plug wounds.
	4. Blood carries cells of the immune system to fight infections.

    C. Components 
	1. Blood has two main parts: liquids and solids.
	2. The liquid part, plasma, is mostly water.
	3. The solids, called the formed elements, contain three different parts.
	    a) The red blood cells (RBCs), also called erythrocytes, carry oxygen to all cells.
	    b) The white blood cells (WBCs), also called leukocytes, carry the immune system cells.
	    c) The platelets are cell fragments that help to plug wounds.

4. Blood Vessels
    A. Arteries
	1. Arteries carry blood away from the hearts, and are muscular and change diameters by relaxing
	   and constricting their smooth muscle. The pressure of blood in arteries is higher.
	2. The largest artery is the aorta, which comes straight out of the heart. Smaller arteries are called arterioles.

    B. Capillaries
	1. Capillaries are the smallest of the vessels. The smallest ones are only one cell layer thick. 
	2. Capillaries are where the exchange of gases and nutrients between the blood and cells occurs.

    C. Veins
	1. Veins carry blood back to the heart under very low pressure.
	2. Veins are not muscular like arteries are. They contain one way valves to only

5. Lymphatic System
    A. Functions
	1. The lymphatic system drains excess fluid that collects around cells and returns it to the blood. The fluid
	   that flows in the lymphatic system is called lymph.
	2. Lymph also transports dietary lipids and fat-soluble vitamins from the digestive system to 
	   the blood.
	3. Cells from the immune system travel through lymph.

    B. Structures
	1. Lymph capillaries are tiny structures located in the spaces between cells. They are very thin
	   walled and only allow for the inflow of fluid.
	2. The capillaries turn into larger vessels that eventually merge with the blood circulatory
	   system. 
	3. Lymph nodes are bean-shaped structures that are located throughout the body, but concentrated
	   in the neck, armpits and groin. They filter the lymph, and immune system cells attack foreign
	   invaders like pathogens.
	4. The thymus is located behind the breastbone and serves as a site where T cells form the immune
	   system mature.
	5. The spleen is located near the liver and serves as an area where immune system cells attack
	   pathogens. It also stores platelets, which help to plug wounds.
	6. The tonsils, located in the mouth and neck area, serve to filter out pathogens that enter
	   during eating and breathing.

Chapter 33 - Respiration

1. Anatomy
    A. Upper Respiratory System
	1. The nose consists of internal and external parts. The external parts are several bones
	   and cartilage and mucus membrane. The openings of the nose are the nostrils. The internal
	   parts are a cavity and mucus membrane.
	2. Breathing through the nose serves to warm, moisten and filter air. The nose also serves
	   as a resonance chamber for speech.
	3. The pharynx is the throat, which start at the back of the internal nose and ends at the
	   voice box. It functions as a passage way for food and liquid.

    B. Lower Respiratory System
	1. The larynx is the voice box and is made of 9 pieces of cartilage, one of which
	   is the Adam's apple.
	2. The epiglottis is a trap-door structure that closes the entrance to the airway
	   during eating and drinking to prevent food and liquid from entering the lungs.
	3. The vocal folds (cords) produce speech. Air passing over them causes them to
	   vibrate. Short vocal folds, like in children, produce higher sounds, while long
	   vocal folds produce deeper sounds. Whispering doesn't involve the vocal folds.
	4. The trachea is a tube-shaped passageway for air, extending form the larynx to th
	   primary bronchi of the lungs. It's made of numerous C-shaped rings of cartilage.
	5. The trachea divids into the right and left brochi, one of which goes to each lung.
	   The bronchi further divide into many smaller passages, called bronchioles, as they
	   enter the lungs.
	6. The lungs are cone shaped organs in the thoracic cavity. The left lung is about 10%
	   smaller than the right, due to the space the left side of the heart takes up. Structures
	   called alveoli are the sites where the exchange of the gases oxygen and carbon dioxide
	   occur. There are so many of them that the total surface area for the exchange of gas
	   is about 750 square feet, about the size of a tennis court.

2. Respiration
    A. Three Steps
	1. Pulmonary ventilation (breathing) is the moving of air in and out of the lungs.
	2. External respiration is the exchange of gases between the alveoli and the blood.
	3. Internal respiration is the exchange of the gases between the blood and cells.

    B. The Mechanics of Breathing
	1. The diaphragm is the most important muscle for breathing.
	2. Contraction of the diaphragm flattens it, causing the volume of the thoracic
	   cavirty to enlarge. The intercostal (rib) muscles also help with breathing.
	3. This increase in volume causes the prssure in the lungs to decrease, causing air
	   to rush into the lungs.
	4. During exhalation, the diaphragm returns to its resting shape, which decreases
	   the volume of the toracic cavity, raising the pressure in the lungs. This causes
	   air to leave the lungs.
	5. The diaphragm is a somewhat unique skeletal muscle. Most of the time the diaphragm
	   is under subconscious control by the brain, to keep us breathing at all times. We can
	   however, exert soem conscious control over breathing to some extent. We can take deep
	   breaths or shallow breaths, or even hold our breath for some time, but cannot hold
	   our breath long enough to kill ourselves. Upon losing consciousness, the automatic functions
	   of the diaphragm take over again, and breathing resumes.

3. Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide Transport
    A. Oxygen Transport
	1. 98.5% of oxygen is bound to hemoglobin, the molecule that transports oxygen in red blood
	   cells. Oxygen is bound to hemoglobin since oxygen doesn't dissolve well in water (blood is mostly water)
	2. Each hemoglobin contains four atoms of iron, each of which can bind one oxygen.
	3. The reason carbon monoxide is so deadly is that it binds much more aggressively with hemoglobin
	   than does oxygen.

    B. Carbon Dioxide Transport
	1. 7& of carbon dioxide is dissolved in blood plasma and is exhaled in the lungs.
	2. 23% is bound to hemoglobin and is exhaled in the lungs.
	3. Most carbon dioxide about 70%, reacts with water to form bicarbonate ions,
	   which travel through the blood, where they reform to carbon dioxide in the lungs
	   and are exhaled.

4. Respiratory Control
    A. Neural Control of Respiration
	1. Clusters of nerve cells in the medulla oblongata of the brainstem control
	   respiration, both breathing in and breathing out.
	2. When these inspiratory nerve cells fire impulses travel to the diaphragm
	   and intercostal muscles of the rib cage, expanding the thorax and causing
	   air to rush in.
	3. When the expiratory nerve cells fire, the diaphragm relaxes, and air rushes
	   out of the lungs. 
	4. Other nerve centers in the brain stem help to smooth out the transition between
	   breathing in and breathing out, and also to fine-tune breathing during activities
	   such as talking and exercise.

    B. Chemical Control of Respiration
	1. Chemoreceptors in the medulla, as well in the aorta and carotid arteries, monitor
	   oxygen and carbon dioxide levels as well as the pH (hydrogen ion levels) of the blood.
	2. Increased concentrations of carbon dioxide and/or decreased levels of oxygen	stimulate
	   the respiratory system and cause increased rate and/or depth of breathing.
	3. If the blood pH declines due to increased levels of hydrogen ions, this also
	   stimulates the respiratory system to breathe faster and deeper, which will
	   eliminate carbon dioxide faster, which will then return the pH of the blood to normal
	   levels.

    C. Respiration and Exercise
	1. Respiratory adjustments during exercise are geared to both intensity and duration of the activity.
	2. The abrupt increase in ventilation that occurs as exercise begins reflects the interaction
	   of three neural factors:
		a) The psychological stimulus from our conscious anticipation of exercise.
		b) The simultaneous activation of skeletal muscles and respiratory centers
	    	   in the brain stem.
		c) There are excitatory impulses that travel to proprioceptors (motion sensors)
	   	   in moving muscles, tendons and joints.

Chapter 34 - Nutrition and Digestion

1. Nutrients
    A. Definitions
	1. Nutrients are substances obtained from the environment that organisms need 
           for growth and survival.
	2. There are 6 categories of nutrients: carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, minerals,
	   vitamins and water.
	3. A calorie is the amount of energy required to raise one gram of water
	   one degree Centigrade. Foods are measured in Calories (1,000 calories).
   
   B. Types of Nutrients 
	1. Carbohydrates (sugars and starches) are used by the body
  	   for quick sources of energy.
	2. Lipids (fats) are the most calorie-dense foods. The body stores excess
	   calories as fat.
	3. Proteins are used to build muscle.
	4. Minerals are elements that the body cannot make, and therefore must be obtained
	   from the diet. The iron in hemoglobin and the iodine in thyroid hormones are two
 	   examples of essential minerals.
	5. Vitamins are also essential nutrients that the body cannot make, or cannot make
	   in high enough quantities, and must be obtained from the diet. Vitamins are
	   required for the proper functioning of enzymes, which control many bodily functions.
	6. Humans are about 60% water, and cannot survive very long without it.
	   Water is the basic component of body liquids, and all metabolic reactions
	   occur in water solutions.

2. Digestive Functions

1. Ingestion
    	1. Ingestion is the taking in of food and liquid.
	2. Digestion of carbohydrates starts in the mouth through the action of the enzyme amylase.

2. Secretion
	1. Each day, cells of the digestive system secrete about 7 liters of water, acid,
	   buffers and enzymes into the digestive tract.
	2. These chemicals are responsible for the digestion of our food.

3. Mixing and Propulsion
	1. Alternating contraction and relaxation of the smooth muscle of the digestive
	   tract mixes food and chemical and propels them through the system.
	2. All this occurs without and conscious input.

4. Digestion
	1. Mechanical digestion begins in the mouth, where the teeth cut and grind food.
	   The stomach churns the food, mixing it with digestive chemicals.
	2. Chemical digestion begins in the mouth, and continues in the stomach and small intestine. 
	   Large molecules of carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins are broken down into smaller
	   molecules that can be absorbed.

5. Absorption
	1. The products of digestion are absorbed into the cell that line the small intestine.
	2. These molecules then pass into the blood and lymph to circulate to all body cells.

3. Digestive Structures

A. Mouth
	1. The mouth is also called the oral or buccal cavity.
	2. The uvula prevents food and liquid from entering the nose during swallowing
	3. The salivary glands produce saliva that moistens the mouth and beings
	   carbohydrate digestion.
	4. The tongue is an accessory digestive organ that contains the taste
	   buds and aids in swallowing.
	5. The teeth are accessory digestive organs located in sockets in the jaws.
	   Humans have two sets of teeth. There are 20 primary (baby) teeth and up to 32
	   secondary (adult) teeth -- 28 regular teeth and up to 4 wisdom teeth.

B. Pharynx
	1. The pharynx is a funnel-shaped structure that extends from the back of the 
	   nose to the esophagus.
	2. Muscular contractions of the pharynx help to move food into the esophagus.

C. Esophagus
	1. The esophagus is a muscular tube that extends from the back of the pharynx
	   to the top of the stomach.
	2. Each end of the esophagus has a circular sphincter muscle that opens and closes.
	   If the lower sphincter that leads to the stomach does not close properly, stomach
	   acid can back up into the esophagus. This burning sensation is called acid reflux
	   (heartburn). This can damage the esophagus or even lead to cancer of the esophagus.

D. Stomach
	1. The stomach is a J-shaped structure located between the end of the esophagus
	   and the beginning of the small intestine.	
	2. The stomach serves as a storage chamber and mixing reservoir. Food is stored
	   in the top of the stomach and released in small quantities at a time
	   into the acid at the bottom of the stomach to begin digestion.
	3. After mixing with the acid for a while, the stomach releases small quantities at a time
	   of this mixture into the small intestine.
	4. The stomach contains several types of cells that produce chemicals. There are cells that
	   produce acid. Cells that produce enzymes, and cells that produce mucus.
   	   The mucus forms a thick lining that protects the stomach itself from the acid, so that it
	   so that it doesn't digest itself.
	5. Very little absorption actually occurs in the stomach. Exceptions include water, some drugs, and
	   alcohol. Alcohol, drunk on an empty stomach, is absorbed very rapidly and produces a more
	   exaggerated effect that when drunk with food.
	6. The stomach empties depending on how much has been put into it. Small meals of easily digested foods
	   like sugars or carbs, move through quickly. Large meals of proteins or fatty foods may take several
	   hours to digest, leaving one feeling full much longer.

E. Pancreas
	1. The pancreas produces about 1,200 ml/day of pancreatic juice. The juice is released into the beginning
	   of the small intestine, just downstream from the stomach. The juice is basic (high) in pH, to neutralize
	   the acid from the stomach (otherwise the small intestine would be digested).
	2. The juice contains a number of enzymes that digest carbs, lipids of proteins.

F. Liver and Gallbladder
	1. The liver and gallbladder are located in the upper part of the abdominal cavity, near the pancreas.
	2. The liver has many different functions. It secretes a chemical called bile, which is released into
	   the small intestine and helps to digest fats. The bile is stored in the gall bladder until needed.
	   The liver also produces numerous enzymes that aid in the digestion of carbs, lipids, and proteins.
	3. The liver processes drugs and detoxifies substances such as alcohol.
	4. The liver stores fat-soluble vitamins like A, B12, D, E & K.

G. Small Intestine
	1. The small intestine is the site where most digestion and absorption of nutrients occurs.
	2. The inside of the small intestine has millions of tiny folds called villi and microvilli
	   that greatly increase the surface area for absorption to occur.
	3. The small intestine begins at the end of the stomach and ends at the large intestine.
	4. Digestion occurs by both mechanical squeezing of the smooth muscle and chemical digestion
 	   by numerous enzymes.
	5. Nutrients are absorbed through the walls of the small intestine and travel into the blood
	   and lymph to reach all cells.

H. Large Intestine
	1. Very little digestion or absorption occurs in the large intestine.	
	2. Bacteria continue to digest materials that the rest of our digestive system can't
	   mainly plant material. Many herbivores  rely almost entirely on the digestive
	   actions of bacteria to break down their food. The unfortunate byproducts of the
	   bacterial digestive actions are smell chemicals, like methane, that produce gas.
	3. One of the main functions of the large intestine is to absorb excess water from the
	   feces. When we are sick, like with food poisoning, the body moves everything through
	   the digestive system rapidly to try to flush out the toxin, producing diarrhea.

Chapter 36 - Defenses Against Disease

1. NonSpecific Resistance
    A. Innate Defenses
	1. These defenses are present at birth
	2. They offer immediate protection against a wide variety of pathogens (disease
	   causing organisms) and foreign substances.

    B. First Lines of Defense: Skin and Mucus Membranes
	1. The skin and mucus membranes provide both physical and chemical barrier to prevent
	   invasion of the body by pathogens.
	2. Bacteria can rarely penetrate healthy, intact skin.
	3. Mucous Membranes, which line the body cavities, secrete mucus, a viscous liquid
	   that can trap pathogens and other foreign substances.
	4. The upper respiratory tract contains cilia, which are microscopic hair-like
	   structures. The waving action of the cilia propels inhaled dust and microbes
	   towards the throat. Coughing and sneezing enhance this process. Swallowing
           mucous sends pathogens to the stomach to be destroyed by acid.
	5. The tear ducts produce an enzyme called lysozyme that helps to clean
	   surface of the eye and kill bacteria.
	6. Saliva helps to wash microbes from the teeth.
	7. Urination helps to keep the urinary system clean.
	8. Defecation and vomiting help to expel microbes.
	9. Oily sebum on the surface of the skin helps to inhibit growth of bacteria and fungi.
    
    C. Second Lines of Defense -- Internal Defenses
	1. Antimicrobial proteins called interferons are produced by virus-infected cells.
	   They diffuse to neighboring cells and help to prevent further viral infection.
	2. Natural killer cells (NKCs) target infected cells and kill them, either by
	   puncturing their cell membrane or by dissolving them with enzymes.
	3. Phagocytes ingest pathogens or cellular debris.
	4. Inflammation is a nonspecific reaction to tissue damage caused by chemicals,
	   burns, extreme temperatures or pathogens. The sings of inflammation are redness,
	   pain, heat and swelling.

2. Specific Resistance: Immunity
    A. Definitions
	1. Immunity is the ability of the body to defend itself against specific invading agent such as bacteria,
	   toxins, viruses and foreign tissue.
	2. Antigens are substances that the body recognizes as foreign that provoke an immune response.
	3. Antibodies are produced by cells of the immune system and bind to antigens to inactivate them.
	4. There are several distinguishing properties of immunity. It is specific for a particular
	   pathogen or foreign molecule. There is also a memory for each pathogen or foreign invader
	   that is encountered, so that if the invader is encountered again, a very rapid response
	   can be mounted.
	5. There are unique proteins on the surface of each cell, called major
	   histocompatibility complex (MHC) that identify "self" from "non-self". Anything
	   that does not have these markers is presumed to be foreign and is attacked by
	   the immune system. Except for identical twins, everyone's mHC proteins are unique.

    B. Cell-Mediated Immunity
	1. This is the first of two methods that your body uses to fight invaders.
	2. T cells which are made in the bone marrow and migrate to the thymus gland
	   to mature (thus the name T cells), directly attack and kill any foreign material.
	3. There are three types of T cells.
	    1) Helper T cells, in response to an invasion of foreign material, cause the 
	       the production of more T cells to be increased.
	    2) Cytotoxic T cells are the actual cells that attack and destroy foreign invaders.
	    3) After the infection is cleared, memory T cells remain behind and circulate
	       in the body, ready to instantly attack if the same infection is encountered again.

    C. Antibody-Mediated Immunity
	1. In response to invasion, another type of cell, call the B cell, is activated. B cells,
	   which also originate in bone marrow (thus the name B cell), produce antibodies to help
	   fight infection.
	2. B cells produce antibodies, which have several effects against invaders. They can block
	   bacterial toxins and help prevent attachment of viruses to healthy cells.
	   They can immobilize bacteria, making them easier to kill. They can also cause
	   pathogens to clump together, making them easier to destroy.
	3. The concept of immunological memory is due to the fact that memory cells continue
	   to circulate in the body after the infection is cleared. These memory cells can launch
	   and attack against a previously encountered invader in hours, rather than the days
	   that is takes the first time. 
	4. The primary response is the body's first response to an infection the first time it is encountered.
	   This response usually takes several days.
	5. The secondary response is the response to subsequent exposure to the same invader, and takes
	   only hours to respond.
	6. Immunological memory is why vaccines work. A vaccine, like for whooping cough, exposes the body
	   to a weakened or killed version of the virus to provoke the primary immune response. If you are then
	   exposed to the virus in the environment, your body can carry out the secondary response and you shouldn't
	   get sick. This is the reason why we usually don't get the same cold twice. Most people get fewer colds as
	   they get older, due to the fact that they've been exposed to most of them by then.

    D. Autoimmune Diseases
	1. Sometimes the body's immune system doesn't work and attack its own tissues. This can produce what
	   are called autoimmune diseases.
	2. Some examples are Type 1 diabetes mellitus, where the immune system attack the 
	   pancreas, multiple sclerosis, where the nerves are attacked, rheumatoid arthritis, where joints
	   are attacked, and lupus, which attacks almost all body tissues.

Chapter 37 - The Endocrine System

1. Background Info
    A. Definitions of Hormones
	1. A hormone is a chemical that is released in on part of the body that regulates cells
	   in another part.
	2. Most hormones enter the fluid between cells, then make their way into the bloodstream.
	3. Hormones exert their effects by binding to receptors on target cells. Receptors are
	   specialized proteins located either on the surface of or inside the cells. Cells with
	   receptors that bind a messenger and respond to it are called target cells. If there is
	   no receptor there is no effect.

    B. Comparison of the Endocrine & Nervous Systems
	1. They both act together to coordinate functions of the body.
	2. The nervous system releases neurotransmitters; the endocrine system releases hormones.
	3. Responses of the endocrine system are slower, but generally longer lasting. Responses
	   of the nervous system are faster but end more quickly.

2. Hormone Secretion & Action
    A. Mechanisms of Action
	1. They may cause molecules to be synthesized
	2. They may change the permeability of cell membranes (to allow ions to flow in and out)
	3. They may cause contraction of smooth or cardiac muscle.	

    B. Secretion
	1. Hormones are usually secreted in short bursts.
	2. Most are controlled by negative feedback loops. A small amount of hormone is released
	   and the effect checked. If the parameter has not returned to normal, more hormone is released.
	   Once the parameter has returned to normal, no more hormone is released. The goal is to reach
	   the desired condition without overshooting. One example of positive feedback loop is the release
	   of oxytocin during the labor of childbirth. Stretching the cervix causes the release of oxytocin,
	   which causes further stretching of the cervix, until birth occurs.
	3. Endocrine glands release their hormones into the fluid surrounding the cells that make the hormones;
	   the hormone eventually makes it way to the blood stream. There is no duct (tube) to release the hormone;
	   therefore these are called ductless glands. To compare, exocrine glands release their product through a duct,
	   typically to the outside of the body. These are also called ducted glands; examples are the tear duct glands and
	   sweat glands.
	
3. Endocrine Glands
    A. Hypothalamus
	1. It is the major link between the nervous and endocrine systems.
	2. It controls the anterior pituitary via various releasing and inhibiting hormones,
	   and receives input from other areas of the brain, internal organs and the eyes.
	3. Painful, stressful and emotional experiences cause changes in its activity.
	4. It controls the automatic functions of the nervous system, as well as regulating
	   body temperature, thirst, hunger, fear, rage and the sex drive.
	
    B. Anterior Pituitary	
	1. It secretes several different hormones, including growth hormone ("GH" [HGH]) and
	   several that control reproductive function (FSH,LH,& PRL). Thyroid stimulating hormone
	   (TSH), which targets the thyroid gland, is also produced by the anterior pituitary. (anterior means front)
	2. It is controlled by the hypothalamus, which secretes hormones that stimulate or inhibit it.

    C. Posterior Pituitary
	1. It does not make any hormones of its own.
	2. It stores and release two hormones from the hypothalamus. Oxytocin targets the uterus
	   causing contractions during labor. Antidiuretic hormone targets the kidneys, helping
	   them to conserve water by producing more concentrated urine.

    D. Thyroid Gland
	1. It is located in the neck.
	2. It produces 3 hormones: T3 and T4, which are thyroid hormones, and calcitonin, which
	   helps to regulate blood calcium levels. Calcitonin lowers blood calcium levels by returning
	   blood calcium to storage in the bones.
	3. Thyroid hormones and stimulatory to body metabolism. Hypothyroidism generally results
	   in a feeling of tiredness, coldness and fatigue. It may also result in weight gain due
	   to reduced metabolism. Hormone replacement therapy helps to reduce these effects. Hyperthyroidism
	   has the opposite effects. Hyperthyroid people tend to be thin overheated and overly energetic.
	   In severe cases the thyroid can be partially removed.  

    E. Parathyroids
	1. They are found on the thyroid gland.
	2. They produce parathyroid hormone, which regulates blood calcium levels. It has the opposite
	   effect of calcitonin, helping to raise blood calcium levels by removing calcium from storage
	   in the bones.

    F. Adrenal Glands
	1. They are located on top of each kidney, and are made of an outer cortex and inner medulla.
	2. The cortex secretes several hormones, including cortisol, which is a hormone involved in
	   the stress response. Chronic over production of cortisol, as due to chronic stress, can
	   result in weight gain in some individuals, as well as the many negative effects of chronic
	   stress.
	3. The medulla secrets epinephrine (adrenaline) and norepinephrine, which are involved in the
	   fight-or-flight response.

    G. Pancreas
	1. The pancreas produces digestive enzymes and hormones.
	2. The hormones it produces are involved in the regulation of blood glucose.
	   Insulin lowers blood glucose levels by making cells more receptive to glucose
	   and glucagon raises blood glucose levels by releasing stored glucose from the liver.

    H. Ovaries & Testes
	1. The ovaries produce estrogen and progesterone, which help to regulate reproduction and
	   maintain the female sexual characteristics.
	2. The testes produce testosterone, which help to regulate reproduction and maintain 
	   the main sexual characteristics.

    I. Pineal Gland
	1. It is located in the brain, and secretes melatonin.
	2. Melatonin helps to regulate the body's biological clock. Secretion of melatonin
	   tens to slow with age, which may lead to age-related sleep problems.

    J. Thymus Gland
	1. Produces the hormone thymosin.
	2. Thymosin stimulates the maturation of T cells of the immune system.

    K. Kidneys
	1. The kidneys produce the hormone erythropoietin.
	2. This hormone stimulates the production of red blood cells in bone marrow.

    L. Digestive Tract
	1. The digestive tract produces various hormones which help to control the secretion
	   of mucus and enzymes in the digestive tract.	
	2. These hormones also regulate the contraction of smooth muscle in the digestive tract
	   and help to regulate appetite.

    M. Fat Cells
	1. Fat cells produce the hormone leptin.
	2. Leptin regulates appetite, among other things, and is required for the onset of
	   puberty. In women, reproductive cycles may be inhibited if body fat levels drop
	   too low.

Chapter 38 - The Nervous System

1. Neurons
    A. Characteristics
	1. Neurons possess electrical excitability, which is the ability to respond to a 
	   stimulus and convert it into an action potential.
	2. An action potential is an electrical signal that travels along the surface of
	   the neuron's membrane.

    B. Structure
	1. Neurons contain the same basic parts as other cells.
	2. The axon is the long part of the neuron that conducts the electrical signal toward
	   another neuron, muscle or gland.
	3. The dendrites are the receiving part of the neuron.

2. Organization
    A. CNS
	1. It consists of the brain and spinal cord.
	2. It processes incoming info, and is the source of all thoughts, emotions and ideas.

    B. The Peripheral Nervous System (PNS)
	1. Includes all nervous tissue outside the CNS
	2. It consists of two parts:
	    a) The somatic NS sends nerves to skeletal muscles and is under voluntary control.
   	    b) The autonomic NS sends nerves to smooth and cardiac muscle and to glands, and is
	       involuntary. It is composed of 2 parts: the sympathetic system, which is the 
	       "fight-or-flight" system, and the parasympathetic system, which is the "rest-and-digest"
	       system.

3. Spinal Cord
    A. Structure
	1. It is located within the vertebral cavity of the vertebral column.
	2. It is heavily protected with layers of tough meninges and fat.

    B. Function
	1. The spinal cord serves to propagate nerve impulses and integrate incoming info.
	2. The spinal cord is involved in reflexes, which are fast, automatic responses designed
	   to help avoid injury, like pulling the hand away from a hot stove. Reflexes don't 
	   involve the brain.

4. Brain
    A. Major Areas
	1. The brainsteam is continuous with the spinal cord and consists of the medulla
	   oblongata, pons and midbrain. It contains areas that automatically control breathing
	   and heartbeat, as well as automatic tracking of visual stimuli.
	2. The cerebellum is located in the back of the skull. Its primary function is to 
	   evaluate the coordination of movements and correct errors. It regulates posture
	   and balance, and makes possible all skilled muscular activities.
	3. The diencephalon contains the thalamus, hypothalamus, and epithalamus. The thalamus
	   senses pain, temperature & pressure. The hypothalamus regulates emotional behaviour, rage
	   aggression, sexual arousal, thirst, hunger and body temperature. The epithalamus controls
	   the pineal gland.
	4. The cerebrum is responsible for all higher-level functions like reading, language, math,
	   music, memory, planning and imagination. It contains areas that control the senses and voluntary
	   movement, as well as association areas that make sense out of what we are sensing. The prefrontal
	   cortex is concerned with personality, intellect, complex learning, recall, judgement and intuition.
	5. The limbic system is called the emotional brain due to its role in emotions, including pain, pleasure
	   and anger, as well as the association between smell and memory.
	6. The reticular activating system rouses us form sleep in response to some stimulus
	   (noise,light,etc.) Curiously, smells don't activate this system. 
